---
layout: post
title: VUnit
tags:
    - VHDL
    - Tools
---

VUnit "features the functionality needed to realize continuous and automated testing" of HDL code.
It takes care of building, running tests (via a simulator like [GHDL]({% post_url 2021-03-25-ghdl %})) and evaluating the results. It also offers VHDL convenience procedures, functions and components as well as Verification Components. This post will cover the build/run functionality, the convenience library will be covered in a separate post.

{% include toc.html %}

## Basics

You can install VUnit with `pip instal vunit_hdl` and documentation is available [here](https://vunit.github.io/)

For a simple, one file design and a single testbench the following python script will build and run the simulation:

```python
{% include_relative includes/vunit/run.py %}
```

Note that VUnit needs to get access to your VHDL testbench to do its magic so this is the minimum you need to add for VUnit to run your tests:
```vhdl
{% include_relative includes/vunit/basic.vhd %}
```

Output from running `./run.py`:

```
{% include_relative includes/vunit/run.txt %}
```

## Configuring Compilation and Tests


I'll demonstrate configuration of tests with the same half adder design from [nandland](https://www.nandland.com/vhdl/modules/module-half-adder.html) which I used in the [VHDL Style Guide]({% post_url 2021-03-15-vhdl-style-guide %}) and [GHDL]({% post_url 2021-03-25-ghdl %}) posts. To show the configuration of compilation, we'll use the VHDL-2008 standard by setting GHDL's `--std` option to `08`. The test configuration will be to inject an error into the test by setting a generic.

I have isolated the code that configures the VUnit library from the CLI code in the `Library` class, this way I can import the configuration in another python script such as in an [Invoke](http://docs.pyinvoke.org/en/latest/getting-started.html) script, example [here](#invoke-example).

```python
{% include_relative includes/vunit/run_vunit.py %}
```

On the last line of `configure_run` I've used a generic `fail` by calling [add\_config](https://vunit.github.io/py/vunit.html#vunit.ui.test.Test.add_config) on the `logic` test to demonstrate how to configure tests and as a byproduct: to show the appearance of failing tests in VUnit. I could have used [lib.set\_generic](https://vunit.github.io/py/vunit.html#vunit.ui.library.Library.set_generic), but that sets the generic for all tests and I would have to run the python script several times with different arguments, perhaps leveraging VUnit's [custom CLI arguments](https://vunit.github.io/py/ui.html#adding-custom-command-line-arguments) recipe. However, by adding a test configuration VUnit runs the test twice, once for each configuration I've told it about.

Expand the "VHDL tesbench code" below for a look at the VHDL code that is being tested. Here I've made use of VUnit's [multiple test case recipe](https://vunit.github.io/user_guide.html#id5) as well.

{% capture details %}
{% highlight vhdl %}
{% include_relative includes/vunit/half_adder_tb.vhd %}
{% endhighlight %}
{% endcapture %}
{% include details.html details=details summary="VHDL testbench code" %}

Running the python script with `./run_vunit.py` results in

```
{% include_relative includes/vunit/run_vunit.txt %}
```

As you can see from the summary section of the output, the logic test runs twice and fails in the second attempt as expected since the `fail` generic has been set to `True`. You can also see that VUnit is running this with GHDL since the error message comes from `/usr/local/bin/ghdl`. Running the python script with the arguments `--clean -v` will show you the compilation and run commands that VUnit issues on your behalf.

## Invoke example

With Invoke I can automate numerous tasks that depend on CLI or python interfaces. In the following script I set VUnits output directory to `_work`.

```python
{% include_relative includes/vunit/tasks.py %}
```

Having installed Invoke with `pip install invoke` I can run `inv run` to execute this task.

## Conclusion

The build/run functionality of VUnit is a great abstraction of this otherwise tedious process, the results parsing helps you focus on the important output and to discard the uninteresting parts, such as long command lines which executed successfully.
